README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <h1 align="center" id="-solidprocess">⚛️ Solid::Process</h1>
  <p align="center"><i>Write business logic for Ruby/Rails that scales.</i></p>
  <p align="center">
    <a href="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process"><img src="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process/maintainability.svg" alt="Maintainability" /></a>
    <a href="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process"><img src="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process/coverage.svg" alt="Code Coverage" /></a>
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Ruby%20%3E%3D%202.7%2C%20%3C%3D%20Head-ruby.svg?colorA=444&colorB=333" alt="Ruby">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Rails%20%3E%3D%206.0%2C%20%3C%3D%20Edge-rails.svg?colorA=444&colorB=333" alt="Rails">
  </p>
</p>

## 📚 Table of Contents <!-- omit from toc -->

- [💡 Introduction](#-introduction)
- [🚀 Getting Started](#-getting-started)
- [📦 Installation](#-installation)
- [🏗️ The Basic Structure](#️-the-basic-structure)
- [📚 Further Reading](#-further-reading)
- [🛠️ Development](#️-development)
- [🤝 Contributing](#-contributing)
- [⚖️ License](#️-license)
- [💜 Code of Conduct](#-code-of-conduct)
- [🙏 Acknowledgments](#-acknowledgments)
- [👤 About](#-about)

## Supported Ruby and Rails <!-- omit from toc -->

This library is tested (100% coverage) against:

| Ruby / Rails | 6.0 | 6.1 | 7.0 | 7.1 | 7.2 | 8.0 | 8.1 | Edge |
|--------------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|
| 2.7          | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |     |     |      |
| 3.0          | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |     |     |      |
| 3.1          |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |     |      |
| 3.2          |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |      |
| 3.3          |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅   |
| 3.4          |     |     |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅   |
| 4.x          |     |     |     |     |     |     | ✅  | ✅   |

## 💡 Introduction

`solid-process` is a Ruby/Rails library designed to encapsulate business logic into manageable processes. It simplifies writing, testing, maintaining, and evolving your code, ensuring it remains clear and approachable as your application scales.

**Features:** (_touch to expand_)

<details open><summary>1️⃣ <strong>Seamless Rails integration</strong></summary>

  > Designed to complement Ruby on Rails, this library integrates smoothly without conflicting with existing framework conventions and features.

</details>

<details open><summary>2️⃣ <strong>Support progressive mastery</strong></summary>

  > Offers an intuitive entry point for novices while providing robust, advanced features that cater to experienced developers.

</details>

<details open><summary>3️⃣ <strong>Promote conceptual integrity and rapid onboarding</strong></summary>

  > By maintaining a consistent design philosophy, `solid-process` reduces the learning curve for new developers, allowing them to contribute more effectively and quickly to a codebase.

</details>

<details open><summary>4️⃣ <strong>Enhanced observability</strong></summary>

  > Equipped with sophisticated instrumentation mechanisms, the library enables detailed logging and tracing without compromising code readability, even when processes are nested.

</details>

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

### Examples <!-- omit in toc -->

Check out [Solid Rails App](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-rails-app) for a complete example of how to use `solid-process` in a Rails application. [Twelve versions (branches)](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-rails-app?tab=readme-ov-file#-repository-branches) show how the gem can be incrementally integrated, access it to see from simple services/form objects to implementing the ports and adapters (hexagonal) architectural pattern.

You can also check the [examples](examples) directory for more simple examples of how to use the gem.

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🚀 Getting Started

**New to Solid::Process?** The comprehensive [Getting Started Guide](docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md) covers everything you need to know:

- ✅ Step-by-step tutorial from basics to advanced
- ✅ Real-world examples (User Registration system)
- ✅ All features explained with working code
- ✅ Perfect for developers AND AI coding agents

> **🤖 AI Agents:** Point your coding assistant to [`docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md`](docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md) for complete API knowledge and patterns.

[**Start Learning →**](docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md)

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 📦 Installation

Install the gem and add to the application's Gemfile by executing:

    $ bundle add solid-process

If bundler is not being used to manage dependencies, install the gem by executing:

    $ gem install solid-process

And require it in your code:

    require 'solid/process'

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🏗️ The Basic Structure

Every `Solid::Process` requires an `input` block (defining attributes) and a `call` method (returning Success or Failure):

```ruby
class User::Creation < Solid::Process
  input do
    attribute :email
    attribute :password
  end

  def call(attributes)
    user = User.create(attributes)

    if user.persisted?
      Success(:user_created, user: user)
    else
      Failure(:user_not_created, user: user)
    end
  end
end

# Call the process
result = User::Creation.call(email: 'alice@example.com', password: 'password')

result.success?     # => true
result.type         # => :user_created
result[:user]       # => #<User id: 1, ...>
```

> **Note:** For validation including password confirmation, see the [Getting Started Guide](docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md).

See the [Getting Started Guide](docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md) for detailed explanations, validations, steps DSL, dependencies, and more.

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 📚 Further Reading

Start with the **[Getting Started Guide](docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md)** for a complete tutorial.

Quick reference cards:

1. [Key Concepts](docs/010_KEY_CONCEPTS.md) — Philosophy and principles
2. [Basic Usage](docs/020_BASIC_USAGE.md) — Input, call, Success/Failure
3. [Intermediate Usage](docs/030_INTERMEDIATE_USAGE.md) — Steps DSL
4. [Advanced Usage](docs/040_ADVANCED_USAGE.md) — Dependencies, composition
5. [Error Handling](docs/050_ERROR_HANDLING.md) — rescue_from and inline rescue
6. [Testing](docs/060_TESTING.md) — Testing with dependency injection
7. [Instrumentation](docs/070_INSTRUMENTATION.md) — Logging and observability
8. [Rails Integration](docs/080_RAILS_INTEGRATION.md) — Rails-specific tips
9. [Internal Libraries](docs/090_INTERNAL_LIBRARIES.md) — Solid::Model, Value, Input
10. [Ports and Adapters](docs/100_PORTS_AND_ADAPTERS.md) — Hexagonal architecture

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🛠️ Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `bundle exec rake matrix` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

```bash
# Run full test suite for current Ruby version
bin/rake matrix

# Run tests for a specific Rails version
bundle exec appraisal rails-8-1 rake test

# Run a single test file
bundle exec appraisal rails-8-1 ruby -Ilib:test test/solid/process/result_test.rb

# Lint (Ruby 3.4+)
bin/rake standard

# Clean install + full test suite (useful when switching Ruby versions)
# asdf set ruby <version>
bin/matrix
```

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and the created tag, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🤝 Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/solid-process/solid-process. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-process/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## ⚖️ License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 💜 Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the Solid::Process project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-process/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

I want to thank some people who helped me by testing and giving feedback as this project took shape, they are:

- [Diego Linhares](https://github.com/diegolinhares) and [Ralf Schmitz Bongiolo](https://github.com/mrbongiolo) they were the brave ones who worked for a few months with the first versions of the ecosystem (it was called B/CDD). Their feedback was essential for improving DX and helped me to pivot some core decisions.
- [Vitor Avelino](https://github.com/vitoravelino), [Tomás Coêlho](https://github.com/tomascco), [Haroldo Furtado](https://github.com/haroldofurtado) (I could repeat Ralf and Diego again) for the various feedbacks, documentation, API, support and words of encouragement.

## 👤 About

[Rodrigo Serradura](https://rodrigoserradura.com) created this project. He is the Solid Process creator and has already made similar gems like the [u-case](https://github.com/serradura/u-case) and [kind](https://github.com/serradura/kind). This gem can be used independently, but it also contains essential features that facilitate the adoption of Solid Process (the method) in code.

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

Commit message:

Restructure docs into two-lane layout (reference + overview)
- Rename docs/000_GETTING_STARTED.md to docs/REFERENCE.md
- Move topic guides (010-100) into docs/overview/
- Update README with Documentation table linking both lanes
- Fix all cross-references to use new paths

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <h1 align="center" id="-solidprocess">⚛️ Solid::Process</h1>
  <p align="center"><i>Write business logic for Ruby/Rails that scales.</i></p>
  <p align="center">
    <a href="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process"><img src="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process/maintainability.svg" alt="Maintainability" /></a>
    <a href="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process"><img src="https://qlty.sh/gh/solid-process/projects/solid-process/coverage.svg" alt="Code Coverage" /></a>
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Ruby%20%3E%3D%202.7%2C%20%3C%3D%20Head-ruby.svg?colorA=444&colorB=333" alt="Ruby">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Rails%20%3E%3D%206.0%2C%20%3C%3D%20Edge-rails.svg?colorA=444&colorB=333" alt="Rails">
  </p>
</p>

## 📚 Table of Contents <!-- omit from toc -->

- [💡 Introduction](#-introduction)
- [🚀 Getting Started](#-getting-started)
- [📦 Installation](#-installation)
- [🏗️ The Basic Structure](#️-the-basic-structure)
- [📚 Documentation](#-documentation)
- [🛠️ Development](#️-development)
- [🤝 Contributing](#-contributing)
- [⚖️ License](#️-license)
- [💜 Code of Conduct](#-code-of-conduct)
- [🙏 Acknowledgments](#-acknowledgments)
- [👤 About](#-about)

## Supported Ruby and Rails <!-- omit from toc -->

This library is tested (100% coverage) against:

| Ruby / Rails | 6.0 | 6.1 | 7.0 | 7.1 | 7.2 | 8.0 | 8.1 | Edge |
|--------------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|
| 2.7          | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |     |     |      |
| 3.0          | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |     |     |      |
| 3.1          |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |     |      |
| 3.2          |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  |     |      |
| 3.3          |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅   |
| 3.4          |     |     |     |     | ✅  | ✅  | ✅  | ✅   |
| 4.x          |     |     |     |     |     |     | ✅  | ✅   |

## 💡 Introduction

`solid-process` is a Ruby/Rails library designed to encapsulate business logic into manageable processes. It simplifies writing, testing, maintaining, and evolving your code, ensuring it remains clear and approachable as your application scales.

**Features:** (_touch to expand_)

<details open><summary>1️⃣ <strong>Seamless Rails integration</strong></summary>

  > Designed to complement Ruby on Rails, this library integrates smoothly without conflicting with existing framework conventions and features.

</details>

<details open><summary>2️⃣ <strong>Support progressive mastery</strong></summary>

  > Offers an intuitive entry point for novices while providing robust, advanced features that cater to experienced developers.

</details>

<details open><summary>3️⃣ <strong>Promote conceptual integrity and rapid onboarding</strong></summary>

  > By maintaining a consistent design philosophy, `solid-process` reduces the learning curve for new developers, allowing them to contribute more effectively and quickly to a codebase.

</details>

<details open><summary>4️⃣ <strong>Enhanced observability</strong></summary>

  > Equipped with sophisticated instrumentation mechanisms, the library enables detailed logging and tracing without compromising code readability, even when processes are nested.

</details>

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

### Examples <!-- omit in toc -->

Check out [Solid Rails App](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-rails-app) for a complete example of how to use `solid-process` in a Rails application. [Twelve versions (branches)](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-rails-app?tab=readme-ov-file#-repository-branches) show how the gem can be incrementally integrated, access it to see from simple services/form objects to implementing the ports and adapters (hexagonal) architectural pattern.

You can also check the [examples](examples) directory for more simple examples of how to use the gem.

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🚀 Getting Started

**New to Solid::Process?** The comprehensive [Reference Guide](docs/REFERENCE.md) covers everything you need to know:

- ✅ Step-by-step tutorial from basics to advanced
- ✅ Real-world examples (User Registration system)
- ✅ All features explained with working code
- ✅ Perfect for developers AND AI coding agents

> **🤖 AI Agents:** Point your coding assistant to [`docs/REFERENCE.md`](docs/REFERENCE.md) for complete API knowledge and patterns.

[**Start Learning →**](docs/REFERENCE.md)

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 📦 Installation

Install the gem and add to the application's Gemfile by executing:

    $ bundle add solid-process

If bundler is not being used to manage dependencies, install the gem by executing:

    $ gem install solid-process

And require it in your code:

    require 'solid/process'

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🏗️ The Basic Structure

Every `Solid::Process` requires an `input` block (defining attributes) and a `call` method (returning Success or Failure):

```ruby
class User::Creation < Solid::Process
  input do
    attribute :email
    attribute :password
  end

  def call(attributes)
    user = User.create(attributes)

    if user.persisted?
      Success(:user_created, user: user)
    else
      Failure(:user_not_created, user: user)
    end
  end
end

# Call the process
result = User::Creation.call(email: 'alice@example.com', password: 'password')

result.success?     # => true
result.type         # => :user_created
result[:user]       # => #<User id: 1, ...>
```

> **Note:** For validation including password confirmation, see the [Reference Guide](docs/REFERENCE.md).

See the [Reference Guide](docs/REFERENCE.md) for detailed explanations, validations, steps DSL, dependencies, and more.

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 📚 Documentation

📖 **[Full Reference](docs/REFERENCE.md)** — Complete guide covering every feature with detailed examples

**Quick Overview** — Bite-sized guides for each topic:

| # | Topic |
|---|-------|
| 1 | [Key Concepts](docs/overview/010_KEY_CONCEPTS.md) — Philosophy and principles |
| 2 | [Basic Usage](docs/overview/020_BASIC_USAGE.md) — Input, call, Success/Failure |
| 3 | [Intermediate Usage](docs/overview/030_INTERMEDIATE_USAGE.md) — Steps DSL |
| 4 | [Advanced Usage](docs/overview/040_ADVANCED_USAGE.md) — Dependencies, composition |
| 5 | [Error Handling](docs/overview/050_ERROR_HANDLING.md) — rescue_from and inline rescue |
| 6 | [Testing](docs/overview/060_TESTING.md) — Testing with dependency injection |
| 7 | [Instrumentation](docs/overview/070_INSTRUMENTATION.md) — Logging and observability |
| 8 | [Rails Integration](docs/overview/080_RAILS_INTEGRATION.md) — Rails-specific tips |
| 9 | [Internal Libraries](docs/overview/090_INTERNAL_LIBRARIES.md) — Solid::Model, Value, Input |
| 10 | [Ports and Adapters](docs/overview/100_PORTS_AND_ADAPTERS.md) — Hexagonal architecture |

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🛠️ Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `bundle exec rake matrix` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

```bash
# Run full test suite for current Ruby version
bin/rake matrix

# Run tests for a specific Rails version
bundle exec appraisal rails-8-1 rake test

# Run a single test file
bundle exec appraisal rails-8-1 ruby -Ilib:test test/solid/process/result_test.rb

# Lint (Ruby 3.4+)
bin/rake standard

# Clean install + full test suite (useful when switching Ruby versions)
# asdf set ruby <version>
bin/matrix
```

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and the created tag, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🤝 Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/solid-process/solid-process. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [code of conduct](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-process/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## ⚖️ License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 💜 Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the Solid::Process project's codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the [code of conduct](https://github.com/solid-process/solid-process/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

I want to thank some people who helped me by testing and giving feedback as this project took shape, they are:

- [Diego Linhares](https://github.com/diegolinhares) and [Ralf Schmitz Bongiolo](https://github.com/mrbongiolo) they were the brave ones who worked for a few months with the first versions of the ecosystem (it was called B/CDD). Their feedback was essential for improving DX and helped me to pivot some core decisions.
- [Vitor Avelino](https://github.com/vitoravelino), [Tomás Coêlho](https://github.com/tomascco), [Haroldo Furtado](https://github.com/haroldofurtado) (I could repeat Ralf and Diego again) for the various feedbacks, documentation, API, support and words of encouragement.

## 👤 About

[Rodrigo Serradura](https://rodrigoserradura.com) created this project. He is the Solid Process creator and has already made similar gems like the [u-case](https://github.com/serradura/u-case) and [kind](https://github.com/serradura/kind). This gem can be used independently, but it also contains essential features that facilitate the adoption of Solid Process (the method) in code.

<p align="right"><a href="#-table-of-contents-">⬆️ &nbsp;back to top</a></p>
